chore: handle backup security findings (#590)
zama-ai/kms: docs/guides/backup.md

Reviewer: Not changed here but I think this command (and the one below) is missing a `--` to separate the `cargo` invocation from the args for the tool.

Author: Running locally it seems to actually not mater whether there is a -- before decrypt

Reviewer: Aha, I did not know that `cargo run` was different. Well, all good then!

Observe that the `randomness` supplied is used along with entropy of the current system to do re-encryption, and thus the command is *not* idempotent. 

> IMPORTANT: IT IS NOT POSSIBLE FOR THE CUSTODIAN TO VALIDATE THE AUTHENTICITY OF A REQUEST! HENCE IT IS PARAMOUNT THAT IT IS VALIDATED OUT-OF-BOUNDS, E.G. THROUGH A DIGEST ON A BLOCKCHAIN.

Reviewer: This note was removed below. Remove it here too? If kept, I think it's "out of band" not "out of bounds"

Author: Actually I would like to keep it, since it is still crucial. I removed it below because it was already mentioned here :)

Reviewer: Ok, please fix the typo and then it's all good.

Author: Done

Run the CLI tool with the `decrypt` command in order to decrypt a backup, and then reencrypt it under a supplied operator keyset. More specifically:
```{bash}

> $ cargo run --bin kms-custodian decrypt --seed-phrase <the seed phrase used for generation> --randomness <random string of chars> --custodian-role <1-indexed role of the custodian> --recovery-request-path <path to the recovery information given by the operator from custodian-recovery-init> --operator-verf-key <the path to the verification key of the KMS operator> --output-path <path to store the custodian's output to the specific operator whose recovery info was given>

Reviewer: Same question here. Shouldn't it be `cargo run --bin kms-custodian -- decrypt --seed-phrase … … …`? Note the `--` in there.

Author: Running locally it seems to actually not mater whether there is a `--` before `decrypt`

```

---

## Protocol details

The rest of this document is background material for readers who want to understand what the CLI commands do under the hood. It is not required to use the tool.

The custodian-based backup protocol provides disaster recovery for KMS operators by Shamir-sharing a per-context backup encryption key across `n` offline custodians, tolerating up to `t` corruptions (`t < n/2`). At recovery time, `t + 1` honest custodians cooperate with the recovering operator to reconstruct the backup decryption key, which is then used to decrypt the operator's private key material from the backup vault.

The alternative backup mode — wrapping the same key under an AWS KMS CMK — is documented in [ai-docs/ARCHITECTURE.md](../../ai-docs/ARCHITECTURE.md#backup-and-recovery).

### Parties

| Party | What it does |
|---|---|

> | **Custodian `B_j`** (`j = 1..n`) | Human-held, offline party. Owns a long-term signing key `sk^{S_j}` and a post-quantum encryption key `sk^{E_j}`, both deterministically derived from a BIP39 seed phrase. Stores nothing online beyond its public-key half published in the `CustodianSetupMessage`. Re-signcrypts its share of the backup key on request. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **Custodian `B_j`** (`j = 1..n`) | Human-held, offline party. Owns a long-term signing key `sk^{S_j}` and a post-quantum encryption key `sk^{E_j}`, both deterministically derived from a BIP39 seed phrase. Stores nothing online beyond its public-key published in the `CustodianSetupMessage`. Re-signcrypts its share of the backup key on request. |
```

> | **Operator `P_i`** (KMS node) | Online KMS server. Holds a long-term signing key `sk^{P_i}`, a TFHE FHE secret key, and other private material that needs backing up. Receives `NewCustodianContext` and, later, `CustodianRecoveryInit` / `CustodianBackupRecovery` gRPC calls from the core-client. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **Operator `P_i`** (KMS node) | Online KMS server. Holds a long-term signing key `sk^{P_i}`, a TFHE secret key, and other private material that needs backing up. Receives `NewCustodianContext` and, later, `CustodianRecoveryInit` / `CustodianBackupRecovery` gRPC calls from the core-client. |
```

| **core-client** | The CLI that drives every gRPC call into the KMS for custodian-based backup. It bundles the operator-bound RPCs (`NewCustodianContext`, `CustodianRecoveryInit`, `CustodianBackupRecovery`, `RestoreFromBackup`) and shuttles the resulting `RecoveryRequest` / `InternalCustodianRecoveryOutput` files between the operator and the custodians out-of-band. Documented in [docs/guides/core_client.md](core_client.md). |

> | **Recovering operator `P_i'`** | A fresh operator process replacing `P_i` after the latter's private storage was lost. Reads only the public storage and the backup vault; coordinates with custodians (via the core-client) to rebuild private state. |

Reviewer 2: 2x P_i here. Maybe rephrase?

Author: Fixed in 34b6082bd3deca0adc6d8a8df9d1c9782af81990

    end

    rect rgba(220, 240, 220, 0.25)
    Note over Cus, Vault: Phase 2 — Custodian context creation
    Cli->>Op: NewCustodianContextRequest
    Op->>Pub: RecoveryValidationMaterial
    Op->>Vault: BackupCiphertext (InternalCustodianContext)
    end

    rect rgba(245, 235, 200, 0.25)
    Note over Cus, Vault: Phase 3 — Ongoing backup
    Op->>Vault: BackupCiphertext (continuous, per PrivDataType write)
    end

    rect rgba(255, 220, 220, 0.25)
    Note over Cus, Vault: Phase 4 — Recovery init
    Cli->>Op: CustodianRecoveryInitRequest
    Pub-->>Op: RecoveryValidationMaterial
    Op-->>Cli: RecoveryRequest
    end

    rect rgba(230, 220, 245, 0.25)
    Note over Cus, Vault: Phase 5 — Custodian re-encryption
    Cli->>Cus: RecoveryRequest (+ operator verf-key, out-of-band)
    Cus-->>Cli: InternalCustodianRecoveryOutput
    end

    rect rgba(220, 245, 240, 0.25)
    Note over Cus, Vault: Phase 6 — Recovery finalization
    Cli->>Op: CustodianRecoveryRequest
    Pub-->>Op: RecoveryValidationMaterial
    Cli->>Op: RestoreFromBackup
    Vault-->>Op: BackupCiphertext (per PrivDataType, in a loop)
    end
```

### Phase 1 — Custodian setup (offline, one-time per custodian)

> Corresponds to [`kms-custodian generate`](#custodian-setup). A future custodian boots the air-gapped machine and runs the command. Keys are deterministically derived from system entropy mixed with a user-supplied `--randomness` string; the matching BIP39 seed phrase is printed to stdout **once** and must be copied onto paper.

Reviewer 2: > Keys are deterministically derived from system entropy mixed with a user-supplied `--randomness` string;

Nit: is it really deterministically derived? I guess we want this step to be as indeterministic as possible, even if it's just a _pseudo_-random generator.

Author: Technically it is deterministic _given_ the entropy. But rephrased in 34b6082bd3deca0adc6d8a8df9d1c9782af81990

The seed phrase is the only durable secret the custodian holds. `sk^{E_j}` and `sk^{S_j}` are re-derived from it whenever the custodian participates in a recovery.

### Phase 2 — Custodian context creation (online, one-time per context)

> The core-client gathers `n` `CustodianSetupMessage`s (from each custodian's `--path` file), picks a corruption threshold `t < n/2`, and issues a `NewCustodianContext` gRPC call to every operator in the KMS cluster. Each operator, independently: generates a per-context backup keypair `(sk^{B}, pk^{B})`, Shamir-shares `sk^{B}` into `n` shares, builds and signcrypts one `BackupMaterial` per custodian role, computes a commitment over each `BackupMaterial`, packages everything into a signed `RecoveryValidationMaterial` (written to public storage at `request_id = custodian_context_id`), and encrypts the resulting `InternalCustodianContext` into a `BackupCiphertext` for the backup vault. After secret-sharing, the operator drops `sk^{B}` and installs `pk^{B}` in its `SecretSharing` keychain.

Reviewer 2: >written to public storage

whose pub storage?

Author: Added  in 34b6082bd3deca0adc6d8a8df9d1c9782af81990

Notes:
- The Shamir threshold encoded inside `RecoveryValidationMaterial.custodian_context.threshold` is the **recovery** threshold (`t + 1` shares needed). `Operator::new_for_sharing` enforces `t < n/2`.
- `sk^{B}` is **only** held in memory during this RPC. After secret-sharing it, the operator drops it.
- The commitment `c_j = H(BackupMaterial_j)` is what the recovering operator later checks against the decrypted material — it lets a single signature on `RecoveryValidationMaterial` authenticate every share at once, without making the encrypted plaintext public.

### Phase 3 — Ongoing backup (whenever the operator writes private material)

> When the operator writes any `PrivDataType` (signing key, threshold FHE keys, custodian context itself, etc.) into private storage, the `SecretSharing` keychain wraps the bytes under `pk^{B}` and stores the resulting `BackupCiphertext` in the backup vault, tagged with the originating `RequestId` and `PrivDataType`. The custodians never see this material — only `pk^{B}` matters here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the operator writes any `PrivDataType` (signing key, threshold FHE keys, custodian context itself, etc.) to private storage, the `SecretSharing` keychain encrypts the data under `pk^{B}` and stores the resulting `BackupCiphertext` in the backup vault, tagged with the originating `RequestId` and `PrivDataType`. The custodians never see this material — only `pk^{B}` matters here.
```

The recovering operator has the same long-term signing key as the original (recovered out of band from public storage), so `RecoveryValidationMaterial`'s signature still verifies.

`sk^{e_i}` lives only in process memory; restarting the server discards it. `overwrite_ephemeral_key=true` lets a stuck recovery be re-initiated.

### Phase 5 — Custodian re-encryption (offline, manual)

Corresponds to [`kms-custodian decrypt`](#recovery-decryption-of-backup). The core-client (or operator's human operator) distributes the `RecoveryRequest` and the recovering operator's verification key out-of-band to each custodian's air-gapped machine. The custodian boots, types in the seed phrase, and runs the command: re-derives `(sk^{E_j}, sk^{S_j})` from the seed phrase, unsigncrypts its share of `BackupMaterial` from `cts[j]`, sanity-checks the metadata inside and then re-signcrypts the same `BackupMaterial` to the operator's ephemeral key `pk^{e_i}`, and writes the resulting `InternalCustodianRecoveryOutput` to `--output-path`.

> The custodian's only cryptographic obligation is "decrypt your share and re-signcrypt it for the operator's ephemeral key". The custodian can't (and isn't asked to) judge whether this request is legitimate — see the warning at the top of the [Recovery](#recovery-decryption-of-backup) section.

Reviewer 2: should we mention here (again?) that the request comes from a trusted, out-of-band channel?

Author: Added in 34b6082bd3deca0adc6d8a8df9d1c9782af81990

### Phase 6 — Recovery finalization (operator reconstructs)

> The core-client collects `t + 1` (or more) custodian output files and sends them, in a single `CustodianRecoveryRequest`, to every operator in the cluster. The recovering operator re-reads `RecoveryValidationMaterial` from public storage and validates each `CustodianRecoveryOutput`, and once at least `t + 1` shares pass — Shamir-reconstructs `sk^{B}` and installs it in the `SecretSharing` keychain. A subsequent `RestoreFromBackup` call then iterates every `BackupCiphertext` in the backup vault, decrypts each with `sk^{B}`, and writes the plaintext into the now-empty private storage.

Reviewer 2: > The core-client collects `t + 1` (or more) custodian output files and sends them, in a single `CustodianRecoveryRequest`, to every operator in the cluster.

why every operator? wouldn't we restore only a single operator?

Author: Fixed in 34b6082bd3deca0adc6d8a8df9d1c9782af81990
